 
 
Page 1 of 7 
CS 314 – Elements of Software Engineering 
Fall 2024 
 
Instructor 
Chris Gilmore 
Office 
FAB 120-01 
Office Hours 
The hour before class and by appointment 
Email 
grimjack@pdx.edu 
CRN 
10792 
Credits 
4 
Location 
FAB 10 
Meeting 
Schedule 
Monday/Wednesday 18:40-20:30 
Course Objective 
• To study techniques for software development from problem specification 
through design, implementation, testing, and maintenance 
Course Outcomes/Learning Objectives 
• To train students in developing medium-scale software, and to give practice 
in such a project. The purpose is to prepare them for projects in 
subsequent courses. 
• Upon the successful completion of this class, students will be able to: 
o Recognize the stakeholders in any software project. 
o Separate software development into independent phases for the 
purpose of controlling the process. 
o Participate in a developer-customer dialog about requirements for a 
particular software system. 
o Design software to solve a problem of small- to medium complexity 
and express the design formally. 
o Develop a Validation & Verification Plan using an appropriate 
combination of inspection, testing and formal methods. 


 
Page 2 of 7 
o Using iterative enhancement, implement a software design to create 
a working system that must pass a user acceptance test, correcting 
any failures discovered. 
o Understand the difference between black-box, clear-box and gray-
box testing, and explain the significance of test coverage for each of 
these. 
o Use basic software tools to aid in software development. 
Course Prerequisites 
• Programming skills (CS 161, 162, 163, and 202) in a high-level language  
Required Materials 
• Required: Ian Sommerville, Software Engineering 10th Ed., Addison-Wesley. 
Grading Criteria 
• Exams: 40% 
o Midterm & Final 
• Term project: 40% 
o The term project will be a group software development project. 
o The term project will be announced on October 7th 
o Due Days: 
§ Requirement Document Due: October 21st 
§ Design Document Due: November 4th 
§ Test Plan Due: November 18th 
§ Project Report and Final Deliverables: December 6th 
• Homework assignments: 15% 
• Class and group participation: 5% 
Flexibility Statement 
The instructor reserves the right to modify course content and/or substitute 
assignments and learning activities in response to institutional, weather, or class 
situations. 


 
Page 3 of 7 
Course Calendar/Schedule 
• The class schedule can be found in Canvas, in the Modules area. 
Course Attendance and Make-up Policies 
• Attendance Policy: 
o Due to new regulations, attendance will be taken at each class 
• Submission Policy: 
o Each assignment must be submitted electronically in word or pdf 
format by 11:59PM on due day. 
o Each submission must contain the name, email address, and ID of the 
student, the assignment number, and the date and time of the 
submission. 
• Late Policy: 
o Each student has three late days that they can use during the quarter 
with no penalty (one assignment three days late, or three 
assignments one day late, etc.). Once late days are used up, no credit 
will be given for late assignments. 
• Collaboration Policy: 
o You are encouraged to discuss homework problems with your 
classmates. However, everyone must write up his or her own 
solution sets. Furthermore, any collaboration must be acknowledged 
by writing the names of your collaborators on the front page of the 
assignment. Copied assignments or code, or unacknowledged 
collaboration will be considered academic misconduct, an ethical 
breach of trust, and I will deal with such cases harshly. 
Academics 
• PSU Grading System 
Drop/Withdraw Deadlines 
• Academic calendar 


 
Page 4 of 7 
Academic Integrity 
• Academic integrity is a vital part of the educational experience at PSU. 
The Student Code of Conduct is the university’s policy on academic 
dishonesty. A confirmed violation of that code in this course may result in 
failure of the course. 
Incomplete Grades Policy 
• Students do not have a right to receive or demand an Incomplete grade. 
The option of assigning an Incomplete grade is at the discretion of the 
instructor when these criteria are met: 
o Required satisfactory course completion/participation 
o Reasonable justification for the request 
o Not sought as a substitute for a poor grade 
o Presence of a written agreement (such as the Incomplete Contract) 
o A plan in place to resolve Incomplete status 
• The Office of the Registrar’s website has the full Incomplete Grades policy.  
Student Services 
Disability Access Statement 
• If you have, or think you may have, a disability that may affect your work in 
this class and feel you need accommodations, contact the Disability 
Resource Center to schedule an appointment and initiate a conversation 
about reasonable accommodations. The DRC is at 116 Smith Memorial 
Student Union, 1825 SW Broadway; 503-725-4150; drc@pdx.edu. 
Basic Needs at Portland State 
• It can be challenging to do your best in class if you have trouble meeting 
basic needs like safe shelter, sleep, and nutrition. Resource centers across 
campus are here to provide assistance, referrals, and support. Please 
contact anyone on this list for assistance: 
o Basic Needs Hub: basicneedshub@pdx.edu 
o Portland State Food Pantry: psufp.com or pantry@pdx.edu 
o C.A.R.E. Program: askdos@pdx.edu, (503) 725-4422 
o Student Health & Counseling: askshac@pdx.edu, (503) 725-2800 
 


 
Page 5 of 7 
Understanding Sexual Misconduct 
• PSU desires to create a safe campus. As part of that mission, PSU requires 
all students to take the Understanding Sexual Misconduct and Resources 
learning module. If you or someone you know has been harassed or 
assaulted, you can find the appropriate resources on PSU’s Sexual 
Misconduct Response website. 
Title IX Reporting 
• Students frequently come to me for assistance in matters not related to the 
course material. Please be aware that PSU’s policies require instructors to 
report any instance of sexual harassment, sexual and relationship violence 
and/or other forms of prohibited discrimination to university officials, who 
will keep the information private. If you would rather share information 
about these matters with a PSU staff member who does not have these 
reporting responsibilities and can keep the information confidential, please 
use these campus resources: 
o Confidential Advocates: 503-894-7982 or schedule online (for 
matters regarding sexual harassment and sexual and relationship 
violence) 
o Center for Student Health and Counseling: 1880 SW 6th Avenue 
#200; 503-725-2800 
Discrimination and Bias Incidents 
• The Office of Equity and Compliance (OEC) addresses complaints of 
discrimination, discriminatory Harassment, and sexual harassment against 
employees (faculty and staff). If you or someone you know believes they 
have been discriminated against, you may file a complaint. Someone from 
the OEC will contact you to discuss how to best address your complaint. 
• The Bias Review Team (BRT) gathers information on bias incidents that 
happen on and around campus, and gives resources and support to 
individuals who experience them. You can report a bias incident you 
experienced or learned about. A member of the BRT will contact you if you 
indicate you would like to be contacted. 


 
Page 6 of 7 
Religious Accommodations 
• If you would like to obtain religious accommodations, such as flexibility in 
attending evening courses or extension on assignments, please contact 
your instructors. If you need additional assistance, please contact the Office 
of the Dean of Student Life (DOSL) by emailing askdos@pdx.edu. 
Cultural Resource Centers 
• Cultural Resource Centers (CRCs) create a student-centered inclusive 
environment that enriches the university experience. They honor diversity, 
explore social justice issues, celebrate cultural traditions, and foster 
student identities, success, and leadership. They provide opportunities for 
student leadership, employment, and volunteering; student resources such 
as computer labs, event, lounge, and study spaces; and extensive 
programming. All are welcome! 
o Multicultural Student Center 
o La Casa Latina Student Center 
o Native American Student and Community Center 
o Pan African Commons 
o Pacific Islander, Asian, and Asian American Student Center 
o Middle East, North Africa, South Asia Initiative 
COVID-19 Response 
• The University has established rules and policies to make the return to the 
classroom as safe as possible. To learn about Portland State's activities to 
reduce the spread of COVID-19, visit PSU’s COVID-19 Response page.  
• If you need advice on testing and/or quarantine, visit The Center for 
Student Health and Counseling (SHAC)’s COVID-19 FAQ page or call 503-
725-2800.   
• Also. please notify me (i.e. your instructor), should you need to miss a class 
period for any of these reasons so that we can discuss strategies to support 
your learning during this time. If I become ill or need to quarantine during 
the term, either I or the department chair will notify you via PSU email 
about my absence and how course instruction will continue.  


 
Page 7 of 7 
Failure to Comply with Any of these Rules 
• As the instructor of this course, the University has given me the authority to 
require your compliance with these policies. If you do not comply with 
these requirements, I may ask you to leave the classroom, or I may need to 
cancel the class session entirely. 
• In addition, failure to comply with these requirements may result in a 
referral to the Office of the Dean of Student Life to consider charges under 
PSU's Code of Conduct. A student found to have violated a university rule 
(or rules) through the due process of student conduct might face 
disciplinary and educational sanctions (or consequences). For a complete 
list of sanctions, see Section 14 of the Student Code of Conduct & 
Responsibility. 
Guidance May Change 
• Please note that the University rules, policies, and guidance may change at 
any time at the direction of the CDC, State, or County requirements. Please 
review the University’s main COVID-19 Response webpage and look for 
emails from the University on these topics. 
 
